               On Ambient Authority

This blog is the second in a series on Genode for not-so-technical
people. In the blogs I try to answer the question what Genode offers
on safety and usability that other systems don't. Read the
[https://genodians.org/guido/2019-02-28-on-microkernels-vs-monoliths - first part here].

This blog discusses the concept of Ambient Authority.

:Ambient: it's in the air around, just ready to be picked.

:Authority: The right to use a resource.

This authority could be explicit: "here's the key to my car, be careful
with it," or implicit: "no need to ask if you want to charge your
phone, just plug it in". Or it could be literally ambient: "the air we
breathe".

The concept of ambient authority in computers is best explained with
an analogy.

Image you're in a supermarket. You have a basket in your left
hand. You walk around the aisles and pick the products you want with
your right hand and put those in your basket. At some point you decide
you have all you need and head for the checkout. You put all the items
on the conveyor belt. The cashier calculates the total price and you
pay. Then you take your items and leave.

What authorities are given to you by the supermarket?

* browse the aisles.
* collect products.
* take them out. (paying changes ownership)

But there are more, you can:

* leave products at different shelves;
* eat the food before paying;
* throw them on the ground (destroy items);
* throw a whole shelve to the ground;
* take your gun and shoot shoppers and employees;
* detonate your nuclear bomb and destroy the entire supermarket.

The first three are expected behaviour that most people live up
to. The other six are unwanted behaviour in a supermarkt. You have to
option to misbehave, there is nothing a shop owner can do to prevent
you from doing so. The shop owner could report you to the police, but
that's too late, the damage has been done.

In computers it's just like that. You can:

* browse your files
* collect them in a zip file
* mail these to a friend

The other rights also apply to computers, you can:

* move files around;
* change the files (edit documents, bomb some photos);
* delete emails, photos, files;
* delete folders;
* stop processes (called 'kill' in linux);
* reformat the hard disk and destroy everything on it.

What's considered inappropriate in a supermarket is actually needed to use a computer.

The rights I described are just the rights to work with files on disk. There are
more rights in a computer but these don't translate so easy to a
supermarket analogy. With the network-rights, you can browse the web,
copy photos via bluetooth from your phone to your desktop computer or
play a network game with strangers.

In an ambient authority system each process can access these rights
when it needs to. Many processes need a just subset of the
capabilities that an OS provides. A game needs keyboard and joystick
input, audio-video output and some space on the disk to store the
program and your progress. A multiplayer game needs network
connectivity as well to connect to the game server.

Without those rights available, the software would not work.

In the next blog, I'll describe why ambient authority is [https://genodians.org/guido/2019-04-23-the-case-against-ambient-authority - not a good architecture for normal computer users].
